CIP-[Draft]: Extending Mainnet: Tokenomics Alignment Across the Entire Canton Network
Author: Shaul Kfir (Digital Asset)
Type: Tokenomics
Status: Draft
1. Summary
This proposal introduces a unified pricing mechanism and tokenomic structure for Canton Mainnet across all synchronizers. The objective is to expand the Burn-Mint Equilibrium (BME) and rewards across the entire Canton Network, such that all value-generating use of Canton contributes back to the ecosystem through a single, simple, network-wide experience.
The proposed model enables companies with different needs (e.g., low-throughput vs. high-throughput) to transact at different prices via separate Synchronizers, while maintaining network-wide composability and a unified tokenomics model. It also gives Synchronizer and application operators more flexibility to configure fee mechanisms based on their business needs.
2. Motivation
The Canton Network currently aligns incentives and redistributes fees primarily through transactions coordinated by the Global Synchronizer. Historically, operators of independent synchronizers paid enterprise license fees directly to Digital Asset (DA). However, as DA transitions its intellectual property to open-source, this economic value should no longer be siloed; it must flow directly to the ecosystem at large.
Canton Mainnet is larger than the Global Synchronizer. It is a network of networks spanning all interconnected Validators and Synchronizers. To align the ecosystem, reward active participants, and ensure long-term sustainability, we must expand the Canton tokenomics to cover all Validators and Synchronizers, as they are all part of this single composable Mainnet and derive value from the ecosystem. 
The Canton ecosystem is deeply heterogeneous, and we need to balance several needs to make this transition attractive to all parties:
Enable High Volume, Low-Value Transaction Use Cases: We need to enable high-throughput, low-value transactions (such as payments) and incentivize high-throughput apps to deploy their own Synchronizers and use them to extend the Mainnet.
Gradual onboarding: In practice, many companies start using Canton internally before they’re ready to allow external validators and wallets to connect, and before their applications are used for composed transactions. We want to enable this gradual onboarding experience at a price point that works for most companies. Companies running their own Synchronizers retain full composability with the rest of the network and thus extend Mainnet, but strictly internal transactions do not leverage Canton's unique value propositions and should not incur the same cost for that isolated portion of usage. In practice, our experience shows that companies using Canton for purely internal workflows are unwilling to pay a per-transaction fee unless they have an annual operating cost cap for these internal-only transactions. 
Encouraging Network Capacity: As the load on the Global Synchronizer increases, we actively encourage the deployment of new Synchronizers to add network capacity and reduce load on the Global Synchronizer. We want to ensure that the user experience, pricing, and tokenomic alignment remain one unified experience across all synchronizers as they scale to leverage global infrastructure. 
Flexible fee and reward schemes: Within this unified framework, different synchronizers should be able to experiment with who purchases Synchronizer traffic credits and how they redistribute rewards amongst their users. For example, one app operator may decide to subsidize all activity on their Synchronizer, acting as a paymaster for their app, and retain all app and Validator rewards, while a second operator may want users to pay traffic fees to use their Synchronizer and may also increase Validator rewards to incentivize wallet providers to connect to their Synchronizer.
Lower costs via precommitted spending: Similar to how many enterprise cloud contracts are structured, Canton community members have expressed interest in discounting fees against long-term spend commitments. Predictability of future transaction volume and fee usage benefits the ecosystem and, as such, warrants a discount for those who can commit. 
Fee and network capacity predictability: As users increasingly can predict their burn over time, the ecosystem benefits from higher predictability of TPS and fees. As such, we should incentivize and reward accurate prediction of future bandwidth consumption.
#. Solution Outline
Currently, transactions using the Global Synchronizer purchase traffic by burning Canton Coin at a network-configured rate, denominated in US dollars per megabyte. This requirement to burn CC to purchase traffic credits will be expanded to all synchronizers.
Three discounts will be applied to this base rate. Note that discounts can be cumulative.
Throughput discount - a synchronizer operating at a high throughput will entitle its users to a throughput discount. The discount increases with throughput, i.e., the higher the transactions per second on the synchronizer, the steeper the discount.
Duration discount - a synchronizer committing upfront (via staking) to sustain burn over time will entitle its users to a duration discount. The duration discount increases with duration; i.e., the longer the commitment period, the steeper the discount.
Utility discount - transactions that don’t fully leverage the composable DeFi properties of the network are subject to a utility discount. 
App internal - Internal transactions within a single application (e.g., a stablecoin transfer between two wallets) will receive a first discount
Org internal - Internal transactions within a single organization (e.g., updating internal books and records) will receive a steeper discount

By applying these three discounts, we aim to balance all of the needs mentioned above in the Motivation section.

3. Gross Cost vs. True Economic (Net) Cost
Before detailing the specific pricing curve, it’s important to make the distinction between the gross transaction cost and the true economic (net) cost outlined in the examples below.
While the table and formulas below determine the gross dollar value of CC required to purchase traffic credits, at Burn-Mint Equilibrium (BME), 90.25% of that burn is redistributed as rewards to the app and Validator operators. As such, for every $1 burned to use a synchronizer, roughly 90¢ are returned as rewards to the app and Validator operators using the Synchronizer. Therefore, at Burn-Mint Equilibrium, the net economic cost of transacting on Canton is only 9.75% of the gross prices listed below. While the network is inflationary, the net economics are even better.
4. The Economic Impact at Scale
NOTE TO DRAFT REVIEWERS - all numbers going forward use specific parameters. We can adjust the parameters to achieve the desired outcomes as we get feedback from different stakeholders. As such, the specific prices detailed may change. When providing feedback please be clear if you’re commenting on specific pricing or on the general mechanism proposed.

To understand the impact of aligning tokenomics across the entire network, consider the economic impact of high-throughput extensions to Canton Mainnet.
Using the pricing model suggested later in this CIP, an example Synchronizer operating an app at a sustained 1,000 transfers per second will drive roughly $3.9 billion of annualized burn to the Canton Network. Under this pricing model, a user submitting a transaction pays a gross cost of 12.5¢. However, because of the network's tokenomics, roughly 11.3¢ (90.25%) of that fee is redistributed directly back to the app and Validator operators participating on that specific Synchronizer, which allows them to subsidize or otherwise reward their users, similar to how a credit card issuer may reward the card user with cash back or reward points. Thus, the net economic cost to synchronize such a transaction is 1.22¢.
Further, if the Synchronizer operator pre-commits to sustain this throughput, a further discount is applied. For example, when committing (via staking) to an average of 1,000 TPS for 12 months, the price per transfer goes down to 6.25¢ gross / 0.61¢ net.
Scaling further, a use case generating an average of 10,000 TPS will drive roughly $20 billion in annualized burn at a net cost of 0.61¢ per transfer. With a 12-month commitment, this goes down to 0.3¢. This creates massive macroeconomic value for the Canton ecosystem while keeping net microeconomic costs incredibly low for active participants, thereby driving volume.
Canton traffic credits are user-funded, so despite this solution driving very high burn in aggregate, operators of Synchronizers that extend Mainnet are not burdened with floating massive working capital to subsidize this high-volume throughput. If a Synchronizer operator chooses to subsidize their users’ traffic, they only need enough working capital to purchase credits every 10 minutes, enabling high capital efficiency.
5. Concrete Pricing Examples: Cost per typical CIP-56 token transfer
The pricing formula (detailed in Section 6) relies on multiple parameters that can be tweaked via community governance to adjust these prices. To illustrate the potential outcome, the following table and examples use a specific set of illustrative parameters to show the gross cost per typical CIP-56 token transfer (in cents) based on the extension Synchronizer's throughput (TPS). 
For readers who prefer to first understand the specific pricing mechanism, consider skipping to the next section and then coming back to the examples.
TPS


Total Sync burn / year


Gross tx price
Net tx price
Discounted Net Price per Commitment Period
1 year
2 years
3 years
50% discount
63% discount
68% discount
1
$31m
100¢
9.75¢
4.88¢
3.66¢
3.09¢
10
$157m
50¢
4.88¢
2.44¢
1.83¢
1.54¢
100
$788m
25¢
2.44¢
1.22¢
0.91¢
0.77¢
1,000
$3.9b
12.5¢
1.22¢
0.61¢
0.46¢
0.39¢
10,000
$19.7b
6.25¢
0.61¢
0.3¢
0.23¢
0.19¢
100,000
$98.5b
3.13¢
0.3¢
0.15¢
0.11¢
0.1¢
1,000,000
$492b
1.56¢
0.15¢
0.08¢
0.06¢
0.05¢


(All numbers are extracted from Synchronizer tx pricing curve)
Below are a few concrete examples of applications and their traffic pricing. The specific mechanics will be explained in subsequent sections.
Example 1: Tokenized RWA provider (stablecoin, tokenized deposits, bonds)
An asset issuer has an average of 1 TPS and initially commits to sustaining that level for 12 months. Users will pay 50¢ per transaction in CC burn. Assuming equilibrium, 45¢ will be redistributed as app and Validator rewards to the app provider and users. The RWA issuer will stake roughly $3m of CC to commit to this level. At the end of the 12 months, the stake will be released. The gross burn for the 12 months will be $15.8m. As the asset issuer sees transaction volumes rising and becomes more comfortable committing to longer periods, they may increase their commitment. At an average of 10 TPS over 24 months, they would reduce the burn per transaction to 18.75¢ (1.83¢ net) by staking $24m worth of CC.
Example 2: High-volume payment network / consortium infrastructure
A payment network or a consortium infrastructure (e.g. global correspondent banking, trade finance) sustaining 1000 TPS on average would cost 12.5¢ gross per transaction (1.22¢ net). If they’re willing to stake $395m of CC for 12 months, they can lock in a lower price of 6.25¢ per transaction (0.61¢ net). As throughput increases to 10k TPS, the cost per transaction with a 1 year commitment will drop to 3.13¢ (0.3¢ net). 
Example 3: Bank-internal tokenized deposits
A large multinational bank issues tokenized deposits for its customers. Initially, the bank custodies all user funds and expects that, later, roughly 10% of users will prefer to connect a self-custody wallet or a custodian wallet of their choice. The bank may start without any duration commitment. At 1 TPS or lower, the gross cost per transaction is 10¢ (0.9¢ net). After 5m transactions in any 12-month period, the bank has spent $500k in gross fees, and will no longer need to pay for further internal transactions. As some users start using self-custodied wallets, only these transactions will incur traffic fees.

In all the examples above, the Synchronizer operator(s) may choose whether to act as a paymaster and subsidize the fees themselves or have their users pay them.

Example 4: Trading venue 
A trading venue settles at 1000 TPS. While the trading venue incurs the fee for these settlement transactions, the app rewards are split between the venue and the asset issuers, increasing cost pressure on the venue. To reduce costs, the venue moves volumes to a new synchronizer and commits to 1000 TPS for 12 months, reducing the cost from $1 per transaction to 6.25¢ gross (0.61¢ net) per transaction.
6. The Core Mechanism & Formula
The pricing model starts with three base prices for different transaction types, based on the workflow. The specific parameters shown below are used for all prices in this document and can be changed through community governance.
Regular price: 100¢ - this is the price for a regular mainnet transaction that spans multiple organizations and may compose across multiple applications, e.g., a Delivery-vs-Payment swap of a tokenized bond vs tokenized cash between two token holders.


App-internal price: 30¢ - this is the price for a transaction between multiple distributed parties within a single application, e.g., sending a stablecoin from one wallet to another


Org-internal price: 10¢ - this is the price for a transaction amongst Parties solely hosted on Validators run by the same operator as the Synchronizer, e.g., updating rates on an insurance policy for internal bookkeeping.
The pricing model then calculates a discount based on throughput (TPS) and duration of commitment to that throughput, with a minimum of one month. 
6.1 Step 1: Calculate Throughput Discount
A minimum TPS threshold is set at 1 TPS. 

For every 10x increase in throughput above 1 TPS, we apply a discount T.
The example pricing in this document uses T=50%.
Thus, for any tps, the throughput discount is a number between 0 and 1 calculated as Tlog10(max(1,tps)) 

The throughput discount is available only on extension synchronizers, not on the Global Synchronizer. This is to incentivize increasing the network bandwidth as demand increases.

6.2 Step 2: Calculate Duration Discount
A minimum duration threshold is set to 1 year.
Once this threshold is met, an initial discount of Di=50% is applied.

For every 2x increase in committed duration above the base duration of 1 year, we apply a discount D.
The example pricing in this document uses D=25%.

Thus, for any committed duration d in years, the duration discount is a number between 0 and 1 calculated as Di*Dlog2(max(1,d))

6.3 Step 3: Calculate Transaction Price
The gross transaction price dynamically adjusts based on the transaction type (regular, org-internal) and the two discounts.
Ptype, T,D(tps,d) =Ptype*Di*Dlog2(max(1,d))*Tlog10(max(1,tps)) 
6.4 Org-internal price cap
Our experience shows that many companies start using Canton for purely internal workflows before maturing to blockchain-native use cases, but are unwilling to pay an uncapped per-transaction rate and instead require a price cap for these internal-only transactions. To enable this gradual onboarding and maturation, there will be an annual cap on payments for org-internal transactions. Each Synchronizer will maintain a list of up to 5 Validators designated as org-internal. Once these Valdators accrue $500k in gross fees in any 12-month period, they will no longer be required to consume traffic credits for subsequent org-internal transactions. They will still need to pay for regular cross-organization traffic.

7. Tokenomics & Rewards Distribution
Canton Coin minting and reward accounting continue to work as they do on Mainnet today, with the different pools allocated between parties proportional to the burn:
App rewards remain unchanged. Since activity on extensions is not visible to SVs, the operator(s) of the extension Synchronizer will report allocation of app rewards to Canton Coin’s decentralized synchronizer operator (dso) Party.
Validator rewards remain unchanged. Since activity on extensions is not visible to SVs, the operator(s) of the extension Synchronizer will report allocation of Validator rewards to the dso party.
SV rewards remain unchanged
Dev fund remains unchanged
The operator(s) of a Synchronizer can override the default allocation of app and Validator rewards within the activity on their Synchronizer. For example, if a stablecoin provider is operating its own Synchronizer, it can decide that all app and Validator rewards for that stablecoin’s activity goes to them, or they can decide to distribute these rewards to their users. This allows experimentation with different reward distribution models and affects only the internal distribution of rewards for activity on this Synchronizer.
8. Staking
To commit to a specific TPS for a specific duration, Synchronizer operator(s) will stake 20% of the CC amount for the entire duration of the commitment. This will lock in the price to use that Synchronizer for the duration of the commitment. Any shortfall of burn throughout the commitment period will be automatically burned from the staked pool without providing eligibility for app and Validator rewards. The synchronizer operator is required to replenish any burned stake within a predetermined period, or the discount is canceled, and the rest of the stake is forfeited by continuing to burn every round at the predetermined rate

For example, a Synchronizer operator commits to 10 TPS for 12 months. As long as users burn at a rate of 10 TPS, the staked amount remains unchanged. Should user activity drop to 9 TPS, 1 TPS equivalent will be burned automatically. The synchronizer operator must monitor the staked pool and replenish it as needed. If the staked pool drops below a certain threshold, e.g., 80% for 1 week, the discount is canceled and the staking is forfeited via a sustained burn at 10 TPS equivalent.

Another way to think of staking is the yield it generates to the synchronizer operator’s ecosystem. In the above example, by staking $15m worth of CC, the synchronizer operator reduces the gross burn by $78m and the net burn (at BME) by $7.7m, for a yield of 49% on their locked stake.

Alternatives Considered
(Can expand on these in the final draft)

Only 3 tiers for each discount instead of a smooth & monotonic function - much simpler to explain and understand, but doesn’t incentivize optimal behavior
Duration/TPS cliff (e.g. minimum 6m discount) and a*(1/T)^b discount after cliff (for T>6m), i.e. no discount until you hit the minimum duration and TPS cliff, and then an initial discount applied - increases the incentive to hit the minimum TPS and duration. Makes more sense for duration than for TPS since that’s something the synchronizer controls
3-tier (multi-app, app-internal, org-internal) base prices, e.g 100¢, 30¢, 10¢ - this introduces another distinction between a transaction that spans multiple wallets but a single app (e.g. stablecoin payment) and a composed transaction (e.g. DvP)
Continuous payment for internal transactions after the $500k limit, potentially at a highly discounted price
Allocate SV reward pool to synchronizer operators
Keep Validator/App reward pools fixed to the same parameters as global sync. 
Calculate TPS backwards-looking instead of commitment-based - easily gameable, reduces the need for staking
Adding an infrastructure premium that increases price for highly connected Synchronizers, such that we don’t penalized global sync users
Make the base rate for private synchronizers more expensive than global sync instead of the same rate. The rationale is that if you're using a private sync at low throughput for non-internal transactions, that means you have some other motivation to move off gsync, e.g. you want increased control or you're trying to mitigate quantum risk. If that's the case you should be willing to pay a premium. The main argument against is that it complicates things even more
Instead of the utility discount only look at whether or not the tx is composed, try to estimate the utility by looking at the cumulative TBAR weighting of the featured apps involved in the tx, such that you can price transactions differently based on the amount of apps involved
